TITLE: The Archive Is Alive!
AUTHOR: 
AVATAR: _source/avatar.mp4
FEATURED: 
START: 2026-04
END: 2026-06
TYPE: exhibition
MEDIUM: installation, participatory practice
RESEARCH: generative-archives, bodies-affects, surveillance-politics-of-visibility, live-data-manipulation
ARTISTS INVOLVED: 
Giuseppe di Capua
Federico Russo

EXCERPT: The Archive Is Alive! is an exhibition developed from the research project
The Archive of the #Untamed.

The exhibition explores the archive as a living, porous and generative
structure: a space activated by bodies, data, technologies, participation
and collective presence.

Presented at Spazio Contact, Rome, 8–12 June 2026.

DESCRIPTION: THE ARCHIVE IS ALIVE!

By Micol Gelsi, with Giuseppe Di Capua and Federico Russo
Text by Giorgia Pinzauti

The Archive Is Alive!, the expression that gives the exhibition its title, unfolds as a play of crossings: an invitation to take a moment to become a temporary, intimate and aleatory community.

The intermedial field created by the artistic collective brought together by Micol Gelsi envelops the group of participating spectators, inviting them to place their trust in the work even before entering the gallery. The lowered shutter resists the transparency of the glass, compelling visitors to follow their curiosity, cross the threshold and allow themselves to be traversed by an undisciplined archive.

Within the exhibition’s vibrating field, the archive becomes performative matter, exposing the past while acting upon the present. The archive is living matter: it observes and records us, immediately showing us back to ourselves and projecting us into the future.

Those who prepare this intermedial field do so in order to process intimate emotions and generate a collective output. Dissolving individualism becomes the task of the archivist, who weaves a network of cables and points of connection to stimulate reactions and relationships that will themselves become a future archive—building a genealogy of gestures and affects that will mingle with the sedimentations of the past.

In the “boundless desire for friendship”—to borrow from Hélène Giannecchini’s latest publication, which accompanies the exhibition—we glimpse a multidimensional framework within which alternative genealogies can be constructed: the archive of an ephemeral family, bound together by experience rather than biology.

Within friendship, it becomes possible to feel at ease with the archive, to expose oneself willingly to its dynamics and invent other ways of living and building relationships.

Over the course of the exhibition, a subversive and unpredictable archive of kinship and friendship takes shape: memories belonging to the temporary collectivity of an afternoon, gradually merging with those produced over the days that follow.

What we are invited to experience is a generative exercise in memory, a movement of life that resists the sense of loss. The insistence on recording, preservation and memory—not hierarchical, not sterile, but imbued with intimacy and tenderness—is the current that holds these fragments together, keeping them connected and open to changing configurations.

To live the archive is an act of creation.

Residency output — Spazio Contact, Rome, May 2026
COMMUNICATION:
Dario Chillemi — The Archive Is Alive! | https://dariochillemi.com/tour/

COVER: cover.webp
STATUS:

MAIN LINK:

COLLABORATORS:

CREDITS:

OUTPUTS:
